(upbeat music)
All right in this one
we're going to build a slider.
Looks a little something like this.
A slider is something I've probably built,
I don't know, 3,827 times in my career.
And a slider is one of those things your like,
"Huh, how hard could it be?"
And then you sorta get into it and you go,
"Wow, I realize why people use Slider Library's,
"because they're actually pretty complex."
So what our idea is here today,
is to build the basics of a slider,
in, I don't know, maybe about 60 lines of code.
And then I'm going to sort of hand that off to you
and you can look at how,
"Okay, what other features would I
"like to add to this thing?"
We're also going to be building it
similar to the last gallery one,
where we just built it with JavaScript straight up.
Then when we learn about prototypes and classes,
we're going to refactor it twice,
over to use prototypes as well as to use a classing,
because a really good example of
when you might want to use that.
Couple of things here,
let's look at the Dev/Tools, of these.
I've got two sliders on a page so that we can
really see that you can use the same code over
more than once on the same page.
And if you look at the HTML
that is inside of the slider,
I'll use this first one here.
Open up the slide, you'll see that
I've got all of my 20 slides.
Now as I hit the next button,
you'll see that a slider is just a fancy,
class adder and remover.
Meaning that, as you move through these ones,
we're adding a class of prev, current and next.
To each of them, and we're just moving on through.
There's a little bit of edge cases stuff around
when you loop back, see when we go backwards.
And when you go, reach the end and you queue it on up.
So how does this all work?
Well, I am, in this case I'm going to use SASS,
just to show you we can use SASS.
I'll show you how to get it up and running,
in just a second.
But, the way that it works is that,
we have our slides, which have our background,
it's got a position absolute on it,
it is grid itself so we can center
this number in the middle.
Then what we do is we take our slides
and we put them off screen.
So what we do is, the current slide
is going to be translateX(0).
And if we were to move that over to like 10px,
you see what this does, is we're just moving them
over and over and over,
but by translating something 100%
or maybe I should do that 90% to show you.
We are essentially just putting it outside
of this slides div, and there's an overflow hidden on that.
So you can't see what's outside of it.
So the next slide has a transform of 100%
and the current slide has a translate of 0
and the previous slide has a transform of -100.
And that's where, essentially, how we get our animation.
Now there is a transition on that,
with the 0.25 seconds on it.
And that's what allows it to give us this animation
to slide from side to side.
Now I've done this in a SASS file,
I'm not actually using any of the SASS properties,
anything, so you could just rename this to .css
and then swap it out with .css here.
But I wanted to show you, just in one of these example
that the parcel bundler tool that we're doing
will recognize that, like,
"Hey, you're not supposed to be able to
"just link up a SCSS file."
Why does that work?
Well the parcel bundler will detect these link tags
and it will compile the SASS for us
before it puts it into the browser.
So any SASS that you do want to use,
will automatically be bundled in.
So let's get started on this,
we'll open up our terminal here.
And I want you to go into the exercises folder
and then into the 57 Slider folder.
And go ahead type npm install.
While we do that, let's just crack open our package.json
and you'll see that we have two dependencies here.
We have SASS, which is going to allow us to compile the SASS
and then we have parcel, which is the tool we've been using.
And then when we type npm start,
that will inadvertently run,
I don't know if inadvertently is what I want to say here,
but that will run parcel index.html for us.
So this is what's referred to as a local install here,
rather than a global install where we've been
typing parcel from the command line.
Again we'll go much more into parcel in coming videos,
but I think it's helpful to have it for this one.
You don't necessarily need it, but I think it's helpful
to have it here.
Now we type npm start.
And it should run it on some port
that you have everything running on.
And you see, nothing is really working just yet,
but that is totally fine,
because we haven't written any JavaScript.
So let's jump into our index.js.
You'll see here I'm putting my JS in a source folder,
that's just pretty common thing to do
when you have many JavaScript files,
is to put them in a source folder or a lib folder.
And I'm using that in here, there's nothing else to that.
It's just a folder, a way to organize your files.
So, first thing we're going to do is,
let's make a function called Slider.
And that will take in a slider div, or slider Element.
Sometimes people like to call their variables El on the end,
and that shows you, the developer,
that that is actually an Element
and not just some other variable.
I'm going to keep mine as slider.
And then I'm going to kick it off
with the two sliders that are already on the page.
So if we take a look here,
we've got our div with a class of slider,
then we have each of our slides,
and then inside of that we have all of the slides.
And then we've got some controls underneath that.
Then I have a dog-slider,
where we have our slides in our slide.
Often when you make a plugin like this,
you'll tell somebody in the documentation,
"Make sure that you make your markup
"look something like this."
So we'll go back into our JavaScript here,
and we'll make two variables here.
So const mySlider is equal to Slider.
And we will pass it the reference to that slider,
so document.querySelector('.slider').
And then we'll make another one
called the dogSlider, and pass it dog-slider.
Now, first thing we want to do when we open this up
is check if somebody has passed in a slider.
What we can do is if there's no slider,
than we'll throw a new Error, No slider passed in.
And what that will do is it'll check if
somebody has passed in a slider or not.
However, this will actually not error out,
if I were to make another one, called mySlider2.
And I were to pass it literally anything,
it would still check that you've passed in a value
and this will say,
"Oh that's fine, they passed in something."
So what if we wanted to check,
did they pass in an actual HTML element?
Well, like we've told you before,
if we go and look at the docs for document.querySelector,
let's take a look.
It says the document returns the first element,
so if we click on that,
we see the capital E Element.
And you see that an Element is the
most general based class from which
all objects in a document inherit.
Okay, that maybe is not all that interesting to you
but essentially what that means,
is when we create a div or a span or a, any Element,
it actually inherits all of its based attributes
from the Element in the browser.
And if you open up you're Dev/Tools and you just type
Capital E Element, you'll see that it's a function
for creating an element.
Kind of interesting is that Element
is actually is born from a Node
and a Node is even born from an Event Target,
but we won't go that deep,
because that's a bit of an advanced thing
and honestly not all that useful.
But we would need to know that we have the Element.
So we can use this thing in JavaScript
that will say something like
document is instanceof an Element.
And it will tell you if that is an instance of the Element.
So if we take something like our slider
and we pass it an instanceof
and we change if it is an instanceof capital E Element.
Make sure you spell it right.
It will tell us, 'True.'
So what that means is that the user
has passed in a valid instance of an Element
and we can check with other things like a number,
and say, 'False.'
So we can make this a little bit better at just saying if,
so we'll say if instanceof and then on this side
we'll put slider and this side we'll capital E Element,
so if the slider is an instance of Element
then throw and Error we need the opposite of that.
So I'm going to wrap that in some parenthesis
and then put a bang in front of it
to get the opposite of that.
And then you see on the second time,
it tells us no slider was passed in,
if we delete that, everything works.
So that's even better.
All right, next line of code.
What we need to do is create some variables,
for working with it.
So say create some variables for working with the slider.
And this clicking next and back, like I showed you here,
we are just going to be keeping track
of what the current slide is, what the next slide is,
and what the previous slide is.
So in order to keep track of those, we need some variables
that are going to begin their life empty.
So let current, let previous and let next.
So again those are going to be empty,
because we will fill them up when the slider starts
and when a user navigates with the previous and next button.
Next what we need to do is select
the Elements needed for the slider.
So if we take a look at this, like what Elements do we need?
Oh we need all of the slides,
and we need the previous and the next buttons.
So that's const slides is equal to
slider.querySelectorAll('.slides')
and that is going to not give us the individual slides
that will just give us this one right here.
And the reason why we do slider.querySelectorAll
is because, well lets just console log it.
Console.log(slides)
and see what's in there.
You'll see we get two of them.
One for the top slider and the other,
which is the bottom slider.
So you see the beauty of running two of these at once
is that we can always make sure
as we are building this thing,
that it works for both use cases of it.
So here we're just looking inside
of the slider that got passed in,
not globally on the page,
which is what document query selector would have.
Then we need the prevButton.
GoToPrev, is the class on it
and then we need the nextButton,
make sure you capital N.
Next that.
All right now it's, it's no different
then the last one that we did,
we're just going to be creating a whole bunch of classes
to add and remove the CSS classes
and figure out what is next.
First thing we'll do is we'll make a function
called startSlider
and we're going to populate these variables right here.
So you'll notice that I am going to be updating
the current variable from within this function.
And the reason why I'm not creating
this variable inside of here,
is because we're going to have other functions.
Like function move and we'll have another function
called applyClasses and both of those functions
are going to need to be able to access the current slide.
So by creating this variable inside
of the startSlider function,
that would make it scoped only to this function.
And it would not be accessible in those other functions.
So by creating it up here, all of the functions
that live inside of our slider, will have access to it.
And that is exactly what this concept of a closure is,
meaning that we have these variables that will exist
and the other functions will be able to grab on them.
They're not global variables but they're variables
that live inside the closure of this slider function.
So I'm not going to put a const in front of it,
I'm just going to update the current variable,
and we are either going to set it to be,
the first slide that is in the slider,
or sometimes when people have a slider
they want to start it on a specific slide.
So this first slider I've given you a class of current
and that's we should start it.
And the second one there is no current.
So what we'll do here is say the current
is equal to slider.quarySelector.
Look for something with this class of current,
and if that doesn't exist, we'll use our little
or trick here, it's the slides.firstElementChild.
So that is a property that exists on our slides.
So right here, if I were to grab that
$0, that's our slides.
And the firstElmentChild will
give us access to the one slide
and similarly the lastElementChild will
give us access to the last one.
So there we have current and lets consol.log(current),
just make sure this works.
And then when the person creates the slider
we actually need to run this start slider function.
So what we'll do is we'll just run startSlider,
we'll put a comment,
"When this function runs ...
"when ...
"when this slider is created,
"run the start slider function."
This is often referred to as a constructor
and we'll be getting into that when we hit classes.
So now when I refresh it,
we get 16, which is the current slide.
And we get undefined for the second one.
So that's something, something broke there.
Let's see here.
So I'm going to debug this,
I honestly don't know what happened.
But I think it's helpful for you to see this.
So my thought process here is,
we're not getting like an error cannot read
method query selector of slider.
So that's probably not, there's probably
nothing wrong with slider, maybe slides is undefined?
Let's consol.log what slides is.
Is that the right one?
Yeah so that's right, okay.
Let's consol.log(slides.firstElementChild)
oh, undefined, okay.
So this is giving me undefined for some reason,
so I'm just going to debug it in my Dev/Tools here.
I'll click on Slides.
Give me $0.
Okay, firstElementChild
gives me the first slide.
So,
why is it working here?
But not inside of here?
Slides slider.querySelectorAll,
slides, is there a class on that?
Yeah that's fine.
We'll go into our IndexJS,
we're loading in the script,
after the HTML has been created.
So that is fine, it's not like a race condition.
Let's see if there is firstElementChild,
okay so if I'm seeing it here, there is a firstElementChild.
So it's firstElementChild.
Now that's giving me ...
So if I'm logging slides, you'll see I can open it up.
Oh, I think I see what's going on here.
My slides is querySelectorAll, ahhh.
Not querySelector, what I was going to do
I'll tell you as I was going to do debugger.
And then that would pause and show me the closure of slider.
Hey look at that.
Closure of slider, has a variable called Slides
and it has a length of one
and it shouldn't be length of one,
it should just be the Element itself.
So let's remove the All and that fixes it for us.
So back to it.
There we go, now we have both of our slides.
This should be the first one.
Oh actually, let's consol.log(current).
That's the 16th one and this is the first one.
Why?
Because this one started with a class on it,
there was no class on the second one,
so it starts at the first slide.
Let's go and do the previous one,
is going to be equal to the current.
now how do you get an Element that is
behind the current one?
Well we use previousElementSibling,
so again let me show you a little real quick example
if I open up the slider,
and I grab on number two.
$0.previousElementSibling will give us one.
And if we were to grab onto one,
and it has, gives us previousElementSibling gives us null.
Because there is nothing beside this one.
So we'll set it to,
the previous one is whatever the current one is,
and the previousElementSibling and if that doesn't exist,
then we'll fall back to the last slide,
in our slides directory.
So we'll say slides.lastElementChild.
Real quick, what's the difference between
lastElementChild and lastChild?
And previousElementSibling and previousSibling?
Like why am I using the ones say Element?
Well the real quick difference is,
let me show you,
let's go to the top here, and I'll make a paragraph.
It says, "I <strong>love to eat <strong>pizza."
And then let's go ahead and inspect this.
Now if I were to click on love,
$0, and we get nextSibling,
that gives us, "To eat"
and nextElementSibling is pizza.
So what's the difference?
Well, nextSibling gives us a Node
and a Node can either be straight up text or an Element.
Where as nextElementSibling will give us the actual Element.
And sometimes you're going to have weird things
where you have a space,
and it thinks that that is the next Node.
Always use ElementSibling when
you're looking for an Element.
Then we will.
Let's let me make this a little bit wider,
so we can read what's going on here.
So we got current, previous and the next
is going to be the current.nextElementSibling
or slides.firstElementChild.
Okay, so that's what we're working with here.
We're going to do this quiet a bit more over the time
but if we were to now consol that log,
current, previous and next,
put those in a object so we can see their values.
Current is the first slide,
previous is the last slide,
and next is the second slide.
Good.
If we go to that first one, open it up.
16 is the current slide,
15 is the previous and 17 is the next.
Okay we're in good shape.
Next what we need to do is start applying classes to these.
Because you can see that this ones just not showing up
because it has no classes.
So we'll make a function called applyClasses.
And we will take the current and we'll take the classList
and we will add current.
Previous and next.
So this is going to be prev, and next.
I'm using command D there to select every instance
or the next instance of it.
And then when the thing starts,
we'll just run applyClasses as well.
And there we go, look at that.
Now it is showing us the first slide shows up.
If I were to inspect this,
we see that we have our current, our previous
and our next classes added to each of them.
Next we need a function called move,
that takes in a direction, so back or forwards,
or previous or next, something like that.
Essentially what needs to happen here
is that we need to remove the previous, the current
and the next classes from the previous,
the current and the next.
(chuckle) And then we need to add classes
to the next version of them.
So if I did this manually I could do it like this.
Remove that, oops slid.
Let's make that back to slide.
And then move this one, current.
And then the next is off.
Then what I can do is I go to this one
and add a class of previous.
I go to the 17 and a class of current.
And then I go to this one and add a class of next.
And what that does is it sets it up for the animation,l
if you hover over top of it you can see 16 is to the left,
18 is to the right, 17 is bang right in the middle.
All right.
So, first we need to do is
first strip all the classes off the current slides.
So this is kind of a nifty way to do it
rather than selecting the one with previous
or moving the class of previous
and selecting what's current.
We're going to sort of loop over them.
So we're going to make an array of classes to remove.
So classesToRemove is equal to an array.
And what are the classes we want to remove?
Well previous, current and next.
And then we will take our previous Element
and we'll take the classList and we'll call remove
and now what we have to do is remove will take
three arguments or five arguments,
as many classes as you want to remove,
those will be the arguments.
So prev, current and next.
And then we have to do that with current and next.
But look that's kind of annoying right?
Or we could just like, just pass it
I guess we don't really need to pass
current and next we just do that.
But what is even better is what we can do
is we can take this array of classes to remove
and just spread into that.
Spread into these ones.
And then they would remove all of those classes for it.
Similarly we could even create an array of Elements
prev, current, next.
And loop over those, and for each Element we will remove
the classesToRemove.
Woo!
So I decided not to go with that,
because that's a bit hot shot I think.
Like what's the harm in having three lines?
There's no harm.
It's a little bit more readable in this case
so totally fine to do that.
Then we need to figure out which direction are they going.
Are they going in the next one?
Or are they going to the previous one?
So say if the direction is equal to back,
so if their going backwards, then what we need to do
is we need to take all of these current ...
We need to take our three current,
previous and next variables.
Actually let me reorder that.
Previous, current and next.
And shift them by one.
So if we are going backwards, previous will become current,
current will become next, and 14 will become previous.
(laughing) It's a little bit confusing,
but we're essentially shifting everything one to the left.
Now this is kind of some neat work
that I'm going to do here.
There's a bit of a problem when you're reassigning variables
to be each other, because it will work like this.
We'll say, well, okay so previous
is equal to the current prev.prevElementSibling.
So the current is going to be equal to what previous was.
(laughing) So what we say prev,
but now we run into this problem
where we've already updated what previous is.
So how do we access the old previous?
So you can make a variable called const oldPrev
is equal to prev and then you can say that
current is equal to the oldPrev
and you probably wanted to shut this video off now and say,
"Screw it! I'll become a farmer,
"this doesn't make any sense."
So what I'm going to show you,
is using destructing to switch variables very easily.
So we will destructure the previous,
the current and the next variables
into and then we'll make an array of their new values.
So we will say, "Make an new array of the new values,
"and destructure them over and into the
"prev, current and next variables."
So what that means is that the first thing
I put in this array will be assigned to previous.
The second thing I put in the array will be current
and the third thing will be next.
So the first thing I put into the array
will be prev.previousElementSibling
and then if we're at the case where we're wrapping around
ah, we'll take care of that in a second.
Let's just keep this as simple as possible.
Then the current will be the previous
and the next will be the current.
Okay?
And then else, it's the opposite,
you can just duplicate this,
and we'll say that the previous is going to be the current.
The current is going to be the next
and the next is going to be the next,
the old next.nextElementSibling.
Whoo!
So just picture me drawing some arrows,
(whistle)
right into those.
So current goes into previous, next goes into current and
I know it's a little bit confusing,
but we are just shifting them all one lower.
And then we're just going to rerun
the applyClasses function, which will in turn
just add current, previous and next to them.
And that should work it for us.
So now we can take our prevButton and our nextButton
and hook up click events.
And we can do this right below here.
We'll say, "Listen, Event Listeners,"
prevButton to addEventListener, listen for a click
and when that happens we'll just run
a quick little inline function here that says move(back).
And then we'll duplicate that and say the nextButton
when clicked will run the move function,
we could say like forwards,
but in our case you don't have to pass it anything.
So we can just pass it reference to the move function
and it will run it for us.
So that's the difference there,
if you need to pass an argument to a function
then you need to run an arrow function here.
Or use call or apply, learn about that in the coming video.
I much prefer using the arrow function.
And then if you don't need to pass arguments
then you simply pass it, move function.
Now I think when we click this, whoo.
You see what's happening here?
We're going right through all of them.
Little bit of an error, what's going on here?
Cannot read property, classList of null.
Okay so that's the problem is when we hit the very end,
so look at this previous, current, next.
Fine, fine, fine, but what's going to
happen now where I hit it?
Now we've lost our next.
Our next should be slide one
but we've hit the end here
and then if I do that we lost our current
and now everything is, it's all broken.
Right, you see all the errors building up?
So we need to go and say, when we
have the edge case of previous
we need to say get the previousElementSibling
or the slides.lastElementChild.
And what that will do, see it just formatted it
on it's, on multiple lines now.
What this one will do is say, "Get the prev slide,
"if there is none, get the last slide
"from the entire slider for wrapping."
And then we'll do here is the opposite
so next is nextElementSibling or slides.firstElementChild.
We'll do a little comment here,
"Get the next slide, or if it's at the end,
"loop around and grab the first slide."
Now does it work?
Here's the big, boom!
Is it up here?
It is and it was nicely wrap around for us.
Which is good, let's go down to this one
and make sure that is working.
No, this ones not working.
Okay.
Why not?
Let's go to our console here.
Oh I think I might know, so these buttons aren't working.
Why not?
Let's look, oh look at this.
Classic rookie move by me here.
I have selected, I've used document.querySelector
and grab the button.
And what that does is I bet if I click this,
yeah look their both going based on these buttons
and then this one doesn't work at all.
And that's because I've used querySelector
and it just finds the first element on the page
and binds to that.
So that shouldn't be document, that should be our slider.
We need to look for these buttons,
inside of the actual slider itself.
And now they run all on their own.
So that is a basic slider, 63 lines of code.
It's a little bit confusing with the
prev and next and current, but quiet honestly
I use a slide deck for conferences
and that's pretty much all it is,
there's obviously key bindings
and things like that built into it as well.
Maybe that would be a nice challenge
for you to do right now,
is can you get your arrow keys working for that,
but only when someone is focused in on one of these Divs,
that would be kind of a interesting one to do.
So give that a shot,
we will revisit this when we hit prototypes.
These functions here, applyClasses, move and startSlider
these are going to be moving onto
what are called the prototype.
See you in that one.